content/early-transfers.mdx, before:

export const meta = {
  title: "Evaluating Early Transfers: A Worked Example",
  date: "2024-01",
  shitpost: false,
  draft: false,
}

# The Early Bird Gets The Turd - Analysing Early Transfers

_Let me transport you back in time..._

A richer time, when discourse was filled with hope and optimism for the promise
of a better future that was ultimately never fulfilled. A time when
[dinosaurs](https://twitter.com/FplSigurd) walked the earth.

A time when Jarrod Bowen cost 7.9m to own in FPL, and Manchester City vs Watford
held the record for the highest-xG game in Premier League history.

_New Year's Eve 2023_.

I've taken you here to perform a real analysis of the value of early transfers!
And I think I'll attempt to convince you why - in my opinion - much of what you
think you think about them is (probably) wrong.

<Link
  className="flex justify-center"
  href="https://twitter.com/FF_Trout/status/1744824689136894323"
>
  <Tweet id="1744824689136894323" />
</Link>

## The Situation

As I lace my boots and prepare for a hard night of boozing, my FPL team looks
like this:

<div className="flex justify-center">
  <Image
    className="object-cover object-top py-2"
    alt="An FPL team from 31st December 2023"
    src="/images/fpl-team-31-dec.webp"
    height={217}
    width={163}
  />
</div>

Being addicted to FPL as I am, I can't help but delay my outing to run a few
dozen fairly heavy
[stochastic](https://twitter.com/FF_Trout/status/1514746992282505222) solves
across DGW scenarios for GW21 moves. With Salah off for AFCON, and Haaland
returning to fitness in the next 2 GWs, several obvious candidate moves emerge:

<div className="flex w-full flex-col items-center justify-center gap-2">
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">1. Salah -> Bowen</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~458.6)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">2. Salah -> B.Fernandes</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~457.6)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">3. Salah -> Douglas Luiz</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~457.4)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">...</p>
  </div>
</div>

Any of these moves can be combined with J.Alvarez -> Haaland in the case the
Norwegian was confirmed fit for GW21.

Salah -> Bowen is, according to my solver (and therefore according to me), the
best move. Bowen is expected to rise in price a couple of times before the GW21
deadline, and Salah to fall a couple of times, so a permanent team value swing
of 0.2m is probably on the cards. I also notice in my solves that Salah -> Bowen
almost always remains part of the optimal combination of present moves
regardless of injuries (and many combinations of injuries) to relevant FPL
assets (excluding, of course, Bowen himself).

Given what we know here, can we measure the justification for going early?

## The Approach

As far as I'm aware, there is no good framework for precisely estimating the EV
(expected value) of an early transfer.

$$
\textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

In the above formula, if $\textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}}$ evaluates to
$>0$, the early transfer can be considered worthwhile. While true, this formula
is not very useful, because the value of information is very difficult to
quantify.

However, if we can put an upper bound ($\textrm{UB}$) on the value of
information, we can produce a lower bound ($\textrm{LB}$) on the value of an
early transfer:

$$
\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{UB}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

Again, if $\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}}$ evaluates to $>0$, the early
transfer can be considered at least worthwhile. This formula is more useful,
because we can often bound the value of information from above.

## The Value of Team Cost

To calculate the value of gaining team value, we can study how many more points
we can expect to score with more team value, and measure the marginal value of
added value:

<div className="flex justify-center">
  <Image
    className="object-cover object-top py-2 dark:-hue-rotate-180 dark:invert"
    alt="An FPL team from 31st December 2023"
    src="/images/value-for-money.webp"
    height={500}
    width={1000}
  />
</div>

Right now, the marginal value of added team value is about 0.3 points per GW for
each additional 1m. This number has remained pretty static through the course of
this season, so I think it's pretty reasonable to assume it will hold.

We expected to permanently gain at least 0.2m from making the Salah -> Bowen
move early, and there are 18 GWs left of the season.

In total, we expect to gain at least $0.2 \times 0.3 \times 18 = \bold{1.08}$
points from the early transfer.

## The Upper Bound of the Value of Information

An upper bound for the value of the information we're losing by making the early
transfer is the number of points lost in the worst-possible realisation of
information at the GW21 deadline, multiplied by an upper bound for the
probability of any information realisations at the GW21 deadline which exclude
Salah -> Bowen from the optimal set of transfers.

### How often can we expect a bad realisation of information?

As I mentioned in my description of [the situation](#the-situation), I notice
that Salah -> Bowen appeared in plenty of plans containing injuries and
combinations of injuries to relevant FPL assets.

Obviously, we don't want Bowen if he gets injured. So what is chance he does get
injured?

Well,

| Injury Type | From       | Until      | Days Out |
| ----------- | ---------- | ---------- | -------- |
| Knee        | 2017-12-03 | 2017-12-15 | 12       |
| Muscle      | 2018-02-11 | 2018-02-22 | 11       |
| Foot        | 2018-04-08 | 2018-04-13 | 5        |
| Leg         | 2018-07-11 | 2018-07-12 | 1        |
| Leg         | 2019-01-20 | 2019-01-25 | 5        |
| Knee        | 2019-01-27 | 2019-02-01 | 5        |
| Knock       | 2020-07-23 | 2020-07-25 | 2        |
| Achilles    | 2022-03-06 | 2022-04-02 | 27       |
| Knee        | 2023-11-18 | 2023-12-03 | 15       |
| **Total**   |            |            | **83**   |

So, Jarrod Bowen has been unexpectedly absent for 83 days of football in the
last 6 seasons of football. The football season is about 9 months long, so
that's about 5% of the time.

You could argue that the probability he misses GW21 is lower than 5%, because he
is not currently injured and there is probably a 14-day rest between West Ham's
FA Cup tie and their GW21 fixture. But we're after an upper bound here, so let's
say it's not just not lower than 5%, but in fact 10%, since Bowen has played
more minutes than usual in the last few months.

Besides Bowen, there are some combinations of injuries that exclude Bowen from
the optimal plan. For example, if two important defenders get injured, or both
GKs get injured. Again, let's be very generous here since we're after an upper
bound, and again say there is a 10% chance of other injuries that would drive us
away from the Salah -> Bowen path.

So, in total, the upper bound we'll use for the probability of a realisation of
information bad enough to deter us from Bowen is about
$1 - (1 - 10\%) \times (1 - 10\%) = \bold{19\%}$.

### What is the worst possible realisation of information?

The worst-case scenario is that we have to immediately revert the Salah -> Bowen
move, with a hit. This will cost us **4 points**, no more, no less.

So, a reasonable upper bound for the value of information lost is
$4 \times 19\% = \bold{0.76}$ points.

## Summary

Let's go back to our equation for the lower bound of the value of the early
transfer:

$$
\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{UB}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

$$
\approx 1.08 - 0.76
$$

$$
\gt 0
$$

This suggests that on this day - New Year's Eve 2023 - the early transfer is not
only justifiable, but probably the "correct" decision - if you agree with my
definition of "EV-optimal" decision.

This analysis contains some flaws & limits:

- EV movement can occur before the GW21 deadline for reasons besides injuries,
  such as movement in the betting market. However, we can assume that such
  movement should occur in both directions, and approximately cancel out.

- This applies to my team only. Planning to hold only one player from Liverpool,
  Brighton, and Newcastle in GW21 helps to minimise the risk of combinations of
  injuries that radically alter the optimal plan. That said, I think that a
  sufficient amount of the above analysis holds for almost any manager who
  considered moving early that I would find it difficult to call it an
  objectively "bad" move for any team.

## So, What Did I Do?

I didn't have time to think this out, so I decided instead to leave my bedroom
and get a life.

Commit message:

Update EV movement analysis in early-transfers.mdx

content/early-transfers.mdx, after:

export const meta = {
  title: "Evaluating Early Transfers: A Worked Example",
  date: "2024-01",
  shitpost: false,
  draft: false,
}

# The Early Bird Gets The Turd - Analysing Early Transfers

_Let me transport you back in time..._

A richer time, when discourse was filled with hope and optimism for the promise
of a better future that was ultimately never fulfilled. A time when
[dinosaurs](https://twitter.com/FplSigurd) walked the earth.

A time when Jarrod Bowen cost 7.9m to own in FPL, and Manchester City vs Watford
held the record for the highest-xG game in Premier League history.

_New Year's Eve 2023_.

I've taken you here to perform a real analysis of the value of early transfers!
And I think I'll attempt to convince you why - in my opinion - much of what you
think you think about them is (probably) wrong.

<Link
  className="flex justify-center"
  href="https://twitter.com/FF_Trout/status/1744824689136894323"
>
  <Tweet id="1744824689136894323" />
</Link>

## The Situation

As I lace my boots and prepare for a hard night of boozing, my FPL team looks
like this:

<div className="flex justify-center">
  <Image
    className="object-cover object-top py-2"
    alt="An FPL team from 31st December 2023"
    src="/images/fpl-team-31-dec.webp"
    height={217}
    width={163}
  />
</div>

Being addicted to FPL as I am, I can't help but delay my outing to run a few
dozen fairly heavy
[stochastic](https://twitter.com/FF_Trout/status/1514746992282505222) solves
across DGW scenarios for GW21 moves. With Salah off for AFCON, and Haaland
returning to fitness in the next 2 GWs, several obvious candidate moves emerge:

<div className="flex w-full flex-col items-center justify-center gap-2">
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">1. Salah -> Bowen</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~458.6)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">2. Salah -> B.Fernandes</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~457.6)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">3. Salah -> Douglas Luiz</p>
    <p className="font-mono text-lg text-muted-foreground">(Obj. ~457.4)</p>
  </div>
  <div className="flex w-full justify-center gap-2">
    <p className="font-mono text-lg">...</p>
  </div>
</div>

Any of these moves can be combined with J.Alvarez -> Haaland in the case the
Norwegian was confirmed fit for GW21.

Salah -> Bowen is, according to my solver (and therefore according to me), the
best move. Bowen is expected to rise in price a couple of times before the GW21
deadline, and Salah to fall a couple of times, so a permanent team value swing
of 0.2m is probably on the cards. I also notice in my solves that Salah -> Bowen
almost always remains part of the optimal combination of present moves
regardless of injuries (and many combinations of injuries) to relevant FPL
assets (excluding, of course, Bowen himself).

Given what we know here, can we measure the justification for going early?

## The Approach

As far as I'm aware, there is no good framework for precisely estimating the EV
(expected value) of an early transfer.

$$
\textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

In the above formula, if $\textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}}$ evaluates to
$>0$, the early transfer can be considered worthwhile. While true, this formula
is not very useful, because the value of information is very difficult to
quantify.

However, if we can put an upper bound ($\textrm{UB}$) on the value of
information, we can produce a lower bound ($\textrm{LB}$) on the value of an
early transfer:

$$
\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{UB}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

Again, if $\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}}$ evaluates to $>0$, the early
transfer can be considered at least worthwhile. This formula is more useful,
because we can often bound the value of information from above.

## The Value of Team Cost

To calculate the value of gaining team value, we can study how many more points
we can expect to score with more team value, and measure the marginal value of
added value:

<div className="flex justify-center">
  <Image
    className="object-cover object-top py-2 dark:-hue-rotate-180 dark:invert"
    alt="An FPL team from 31st December 2023"
    src="/images/value-for-money.webp"
    height={500}
    width={1000}
  />
</div>

Right now, the marginal value of added team value is about 0.3 points per GW for
each additional 1m. This number has remained pretty static through the course of
this season, so I think it's pretty reasonable to assume it will hold.

We expected to permanently gain at least 0.2m from making the Salah -> Bowen
move early, and there are 18 GWs left of the season.

In total, we expect to gain at least $0.2 \times 0.3 \times 18 = \bold{1.08}$
points from the early transfer.

## The Upper Bound of the Value of Information

An upper bound for the value of the information we're losing by making the early
transfer is the number of points lost in the worst-possible realisation of
information at the GW21 deadline, multiplied by an upper bound for the
probability of any information realisations at the GW21 deadline which exclude
Salah -> Bowen from the optimal set of transfers.

### How often can we expect a bad realisation of information?

As I mentioned in my description of [the situation](#the-situation), I notice
that Salah -> Bowen appeared in plenty of plans containing injuries and
combinations of injuries to relevant FPL assets.

Obviously, we don't want Bowen if he gets injured. So what is chance he does get
injured?

Well,

| Injury Type | From       | Until      | Days Out |
| ----------- | ---------- | ---------- | -------- |
| Knee        | 2017-12-03 | 2017-12-15 | 12       |
| Muscle      | 2018-02-11 | 2018-02-22 | 11       |
| Foot        | 2018-04-08 | 2018-04-13 | 5        |
| Leg         | 2018-07-11 | 2018-07-12 | 1        |
| Leg         | 2019-01-20 | 2019-01-25 | 5        |
| Knee        | 2019-01-27 | 2019-02-01 | 5        |
| Knock       | 2020-07-23 | 2020-07-25 | 2        |
| Achilles    | 2022-03-06 | 2022-04-02 | 27       |
| Knee        | 2023-11-18 | 2023-12-03 | 15       |
| **Total**   |            |            | **83**   |

So, Jarrod Bowen has been unexpectedly absent for 83 days of football in the
last 6 seasons of football. The football season is about 9 months long, so
that's about 5% of the time.

You could argue that the probability he misses GW21 is lower than 5%, because he
is not currently injured and there is probably a 14-day rest between West Ham's
FA Cup tie and their GW21 fixture. But we're after an upper bound here, so let's
say it's not just not lower than 5%, but in fact 10%, since Bowen has played
more minutes than usual in the last few months.

Besides Bowen, there are some combinations of injuries that exclude Bowen from
the optimal plan. For example, if two important defenders get injured, or both
GKs get injured. Again, let's be very generous here since we're after an upper
bound, and again say there is a 10% chance of other injuries that would drive us
away from the Salah -> Bowen path.

So, in total, the upper bound we'll use for the probability of a realisation of
information bad enough to deter us from Bowen is about
$1 - (1 - 10\%) \times (1 - 10\%) = \bold{19\%}$.

### What is the worst possible realisation of information?

The worst-case scenario is that we have to immediately revert the Salah -> Bowen
move, with a hit. This will cost us **4 points**, no more, no less.

So, a reasonable upper bound for the value of information lost is
$4 \times 19\% = \bold{0.76}$ points.

## Summary

Let's go back to our equation for the lower bound of the value of the early
transfer:

$$
\textrm{LB}_{\textrm{Early Transfer}} = \textrm{EV}_{\textrm{Team Value Gained}} - \textrm{UB}_{\textrm{Info Lost}}
$$

$$
\approx 1.08 - 0.76
$$

$$
\gt 0
$$

This suggests that on this day - New Year's Eve 2023 - the early transfer is not
only justifiable, but probably the "correct" decision - if you agree with my
definition of "EV-optimal" decision.

This analysis contains some flaws & limits:

- EV movement can occur before the GW21 deadline for reasons besides injuries,
  such as position changes or more marginal xMins changes. This is not accounted
  for.

- This applies to my team only. Planning to hold only one player from Liverpool,
  Brighton, and Newcastle in GW21 helps to minimise the risk of combinations of
  injuries that radically alter the optimal plan. That said, I think that a
  sufficient amount of the above analysis holds for almost any manager who
  considered moving early that I would find it difficult to call it an
  objectively "bad" move for any team.

## So, What Did I Do?

I didn't have time to think this out, so I decided instead to leave my bedroom
and get a life.
